
From rwo Thu Feb 19 13:21:37 2004
To: Eric.P.Smith@hq.nasa.gov, Michael.Dopita@anu.edu.au,
    Mike.Disney@astro.cf.ac.uk, Rogier.Windhorst@asu.edu, awalker@noao.edu,
    balick@astro.washington.edu, blades@stsci.edu, bond@stsci.edu,
    calzetti@stsci.edu, dleckrone@hst.nasa.gov, ec@cobi.gsfc.nasa.gov,
    eyoung@as.arizona.edu, fparesce@eso.org, ger@hokupa.ifa.hawaii.edu,
    hall@ifa.hawaii.edu, hartig@stsci.edu, hill@buckeyball.gsfc.nasa.gov,
    holtz@nmsu.edu, inr@stsci.edu, j.silk1@physics.ox.ac.uk,
    jennifer.wiseman-1@nasa.gov, jfrogel@hq.nasa.gov, jtt@bb4.jpl.nasa.gov,
    kimble@ccd.gsfc.nasa.gov, lupie@stsci.edu, macchetto@stsci.edu,
    mackenty@stsci.edu, marcella@phys.ethz.ch, mauro@stsci.edu,
    mmoore3@hq.nasa.gov, mstiavel@stsci.edu, pbenvenu@eso.org, pmc2@ociw.edu,
    robberto@stsci.edu, saha@noao.edu, svwb@stsci.edu, tpham@hst.nasa.gov,
    whitmore@stsci.edu
Subject: WFC3 SOC RESOLUTIONS Feb 04
Content-Length: 10033


19 February 2004


        RESOLUTIONS FROM WFC3 SOC FEBRUARY 2004 MEETING
        ===============================================

The meeting took place three weeks after Administrator O'Keefe
announced the cancellation of HST Servicing Mission 4 by the Space
Shuttle.  In the absence of servicing, it is expected that critical
components within HST will fail such that science operations will have
to cease within about 30 months (50% probability).  The project and
STScI are exploring techniques for extending operations using fewer
than the nominal complement of 3 gyros.  Before HST's orbit decays, a
robot propulsion module will be sent to attach to HST and accomplish a
safe de-orbit.  

Integration and test activities for WFC3 continue at GSFC and Ball.
The instrument performs beautifully and meets or exceeds
specifications in almost all areas tested to date.  SOC is very
impressed by the performance of the instrument and congratulates the
project team for its exemplary work.

It is planned to bring engineering activities to a conclusion within
about 6 months.  Its engineering status and performance will be fully
documented, and the instrument will be placed in safe storage.  SOC
was asked by the project and by NASA Headquarters for its views on
priorities for the close-out period and on possible uses of WFC3 in
missions other than HST.  


1)  PRIORITIES FOR WFC3 CLOSEOUT ACTIVITIES

SOC strongly endorses the project's plan ("Fast Track to Thermal-Vac")
for the WFC3 close-out process.  The main guidelines are these:  (i)
taking no short cuts which would preclude deployment on a reasonable
schedule if SM4 is resurrected; (ii) completing all critical science
characterizations, including the IR channel; (iii) retiring the major known
development risks which are not specific to HST deployment; and
(iv) maximizing the value of WFC3 as an asset potentially available for
other NASA missions within a reasonable cost.  

SOC believes it is imperative to carry this plan to completion.

Two specific performance issues arose during testing of the UVIS
channel: 

   (a) Reflection ghosts appeared at greater than the 0.5% level in 10
       of the 63 filters, including the high priority filters F218W,
       225W, 275W, 300X, 658N.  Fainter ghosts appeared in F606W.
       However, these were starlike, and that would be very
       undesirable in what would be one of the most heavily
       used filters.

       In view of the importance of these filters to the core
       performance of WFC3 in HST or any other likely imaging mission,
       SOC believes it is essential to resolve the ghost problem
       before closeout, presumably by securing and verifying new
       filter designs.
  
   (b) Low-level (a few DN) crosstalk appears in the UVIS data,
       similar, though more pronounced, to effects which have been
       observed in ACS.  Several inexpensive methods to mitigate the
       crosstalk are being explored and will benefit ACS as well as
       WFC3.  

       Again, SOC believes it is essential to resolve the crosstalk
       problem before closeout


2) DEPLOYMENT OF WFC3

The Hubble Space Telescope has been NASA's most prominent and
successful scientific endeavor, second only to Apollo as NASA's
signature mission.  The investments made in HST, including the
servicing missions, have been repaid many times over in both
scientific return and public interest in and support for space
science.  A key to HST's success has been its simultaneous access to
the crucial ultraviolet, optical, and near-infrared spectral bands.
These bands contain the most information about the physics of the
universe, and HST is unique in its access to and performance in them.

No existing or planned telescope, on the ground or in space, will
supersede HST's high resolution, wide field imaging capabilities in
the 0.12-1.0 micron band in the foreseeable future. 

WFC3 was specifically designed to exploit HST's unique capabilities.
It is intended for panchromatic (0.2-1.7 micron), wide-field, high
resolution imaging with an unusually large filter complement. Among
the key scientific problems to which WFC3 would have made major
contributions when deployed on HST are these:

    o Tracing the evolution of dark energy in the universe by
      obtaining high precision light curves for distant supernovae
      at redshifts over 1.  The nature of dark energy is widely
      considered to be the most important problem facing contemporary
      physics. 

    o Establishing the history of star formation in the local
      universe through panchromatic mid-UV to IR imaging of
      nearby galaxies and clusters of galaxies. 

    o Exploiting discoveries from the ongoing GALEX and Spitzer Space
      Telescope missions.  These offer unprecedented sensitivity in UV
      surveys and the mid-far IR domain, respectively.  But WFC3, with
      an optical-UV areal resolution that is thousands of times better
      than either of these, would be essential in many cases to
      capitalizing on the results of these missions.  Chandra is now
      predicted to outlive HST by several years and will not have the
      benefit of coordinated observations even with existing HST
      instruments. 

    o Exploring formation mechanisms for brown dwarfs through a census
      of low mass star populations in nearby star formation regions.

    o Using Lyman dropouts to identify galaxies and proto-galaxies
      during the reionization epoch in the early universe, which is now
      thought to be at redshifts of ~6-8.  WFC3 was specifically
      intended for detection of such systems in the 0.8-1.2 micron
      region, where ground-based observations are difficult due to
      atmospheric spectral features. 

    o Synoptic observations of planetary atmospheres and surfaces at
      high resolution.  

    o Laying the scientific groundwork for the JWST mission by undertaking
      observations of the brighter targets of interest to JWST which
      are below the observing threshold from the ground. 

It is inevitable that deployment of WFC3 on a platform smaller than
HST would involve a significant descope in scientific productivity.

Based on long discussions, and consultations concerning alternative
uses of WFC3, here is our list of deployment options in priority order:

   (1)  SM4.  Since NASA has now commissioned an independent study of
	the safety issues surrounding a servicing mission, it is
	possible that SM4 will be resurrected.  This is obviously by
	far the highest priority option.  As long as SM4 remains a
	possibility, it is essential that no steps be taken that would
	compromise the specified performance of WFC3 or the schedule
	on which it could be made ready for SM4.  Compared to other
	options, the costs and technical feasibility of SM4 are well
	established, and this is now probably the cheapest way of
	deploying WFC3.  

   (2)  Non-Shuttle servicing of HST.  The most interesting possibility
	here is robot servicing using an enhanced version of the
	deorbiting propulsion unit (about $300M) which NASA is already
	developing.  This could carry gyros and batteries which,
	operated from the attached external unit, could extend HST
	science operations for a number of years.  It should be
	feasible to remove WFPC2 and install WFC3 with such a robot
	unit because only two bolts must be loosened and retightened.
	Internal rails and latches insure optical alignment.  A single
	mating connector links in power and communications.  There are
	no obvious serious technical obstacles, and add-on costs might
	not exceed those of a MIDEX mission yet would provide much
	greater scientific return.  

        If Shuttle servicing is found not to be possible, SOC strongly
	recommends that NASA urgently explore all possible avenues for
	placing WFC3 on HST by other means.  Robot servicing is a
	capability that must be of interest to the Moon-Mars initiative.

    (3) 2-m class fast-track telescope:  As recommended by the Bahcall
	Committee (the "HST/JWST Transition Panel"), the best
	alternative to deployment on HST is to place WFC3 in a
	dedicated, 2-m class telescope on a schedule such that the
	"gap" between HST and JWST operations is filled.  This would
	permit recovery of much of the WFC3 science, though the Design
	Reference Mission would have to be scrutinized for detailed
	compromises.  This is likely technically feasible, but
	differential costs would probably exceed those of items (1)
	and (2).  


NASA has the option of making the fully characterized WFC3 hardware
and documentation available for use in PI-class missions as
"government furnished equipment."  There is a broad spectrum of these,
ranging from MIDEX-class ($150-200M) to Probe-class ($600M).  These
encompass areas where SOC has very limited expertise (e.g. planetary
science, high energy astrophysics).  PI-class science is typically
very focussed, and these missions devote long observing periods to a
narrow range of objectives. 

We concluded that a decrease in aperture to 1.0-1.5m in a PI-class
mission would not support most of the unique science programs planned
for HST/WFC3.

We could not reach a consensus on a recommendation concerning PI-class
missions.  Some felt that SOC should not consider any option where the
original prime science goals for the instrument could not be reached.
Others argued that PI teams could well find good uses for WFC3, either
as a finished unit or in the form of its qualified parts (i.e. flight
components and spares).  In particular, the mid-UV capability of WFC3
will remain valuable and unique through the end of the decade.  All
agreed that the value of WFC3 would depend on how quickly such
alternate programs could be implemented. 


Because of these various potential channels for deployment of
WFC3, we reiterate that it is imperative to complete the project's
current plan for testing and documentation of the instrument.  

<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<< END  <<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<


